### Why was Cassandra created?
Understanding how Apache Cassandra works under the hood can greatly improve your chances of running a successful cluster or application. We will reach that understanding by asking some simple, fundamental questions. What types of problems was Cassandra designed to solve? Why does a relational database management system (RDBMS) have difficulty handling those problems? If Cassandra works this way, how should I design my data model to achieve the best performance?

 
#### RDBMS and problems at scale
As the internet grew in popularity around the turn of the century, the systems behind internet architecture began to change. When good ideas were built into popular websites, user traffic increased exponentially. It was not uncommon in 2001 for too much web traffic being the reason for a popular site being slow or a web server going down. Web architects quickly figured out that they could build out multiple instances of their website or application, and distribute traffic with load balancers.

While this helped, some parts of web architectures were difficult to scale out, and remained bottlenecks for performance. Key among them was the database. This problem was further illustrated by Dr. Eric Brewer and Dr. Armando Fox, in their 1999 paper Harvest, Yield, and Scalable Tolerant Systems (http://lab.mscs.mu.edu/Dist2012/lectures/HarvestYield.pdf). This paper was key in describing how large-scale systems would have to be built in the future, in that achieving only two of consistency, availability, and [network]partition tolerance were possible at any one time. The points discussed in Brewer and Fox's paper would go on to be commonly referred to as Brewer's CAP theorem.

This is significant, because when a relational database receives so much traffic that it cannot serve requests, there is little that can be done. Relational databases are both highly-available and consistent, at the expense of not being tolerant to network interruptions (partitions). This is ultimately due to their single-instance, monolithic design.

Perhaps the only way to give relational databases more resources to work with was to scale vertically. This meant adding things such as RAM, CPU cores, and disks to the existing machine instance. While vertical scaling helped to alleviate some of the problems presented by the web scale, it was limited by how many resources the single server architecture could support. It wouldn't be long before vertical scaling was revealed as a band-aid, and the problem would soon present itself again.

NoSQL databases largely came about as new and innovative ways to solve this problem. The key idea was that data could be distributed across multiple instances—providing more resources to a distributed dataset, simply by adding more instances. This practice became known as horizontal scaling. This design required selecting network partition tolerance as an early design choice. Whether more importance was to be placed on data consistency or high availability was largely driven by whichever problem the system architects were trying to solve.

### Cassandra and the CAP theorem
Many of the design ideas behind Apache Cassandra were largely influenced by Amazon Dynamo. It embraced partition-tolerance to be able to scale horizontally when needed, as well as to reduce the likelihood of an outage due to having a single point of failure. Cassandra also prefers to serve its data in a highly-available fashion, and embraces the concept of eventual consistency:


Figure 2.1: A graphical representation of Brewer's CAP theorem, using sides of a triangle to represent the combination of the different properties of consistency, availability, and partition tolerance

When data is written, it is replicated to multiple instances. During this process, it is possible that one (or more) of the replica writes could fail. Reads for this data would then return stale or dirty results. However, one of the design choices for Cassandra was that the possibility of serving stale data outweighed the risk of a request failing. This clearly gives Cassandra a CAP designation as an AP database.