### Cassandra's read path
The Cassandra read path is somewhat more complex. Similar to the write path, structures in-memory and on-disk structures are examined, and then reconciled:



An illustration of the Cassandra read path, illustrating how the different in-memory and on-disk structures work together to satisfy query operations
 

As shown in the preceding figure, a node handling a read operation will send that request on two different paths. One path checks the memtables (in RAM) for the requested data.

If row-caching is enabled (it is disabled by default), it is checked for the requested row, followed by the bloom filter. The bloom filter (Ploetz, et-al 2018) is a probability-based structure in RAM, which speeds up reads from disk by determining which SSTables are likely to contain the requested data.

If the response from the bloom filter is negative, the partition key cache is examined. Unlike the row cache, the partition key cache is enabled by default, and its size is configurable (it defaults to the smaller value of either 5% of available heap or 100 MB). If the requested partition key is located within the partition key cache, its result is then sent to the compression offset. The compression offset is a dictionary/map that contains the on-disk locations for all partition data (SSTables).

If the partition key cache does not contain the requested key, the request is routed to the partition summary instead. There the requested key is examined to obtain a range of partitions for the key, which is then sent to the partition index. The partition index contains all of the partition keys which the node is responsible for. This, in conjunction with the resultant compression offset, will lead to the appropriate SSTable(s) on-disk. The appropriate values are then read, merged with any results obtained from the memtables, and the resultant dataset is returned.

**Note**

Some structures in the read path are predicated on a negative search result from a prior step. Requesting data that does not exist still consumes compute resources, and may even exhibit higher read latencies than queries for data that does exist.

Some quick notes about the read path:

Data is read sequentially from disk, and will be returned in that order. This can be controlled by the table's definition.
Rows can persist across multiple SSTable files. This can slow reads down, so eventually SSTable data is reconciled and the files are condensed during a process called compaction.
When data is read, its obsoleted or deleted values are read as well, and disregarded. Therefore data models allowing for multiple in-place writes and/or deletes will not perform well.